Hey, world. Hey, Brian.
Hey.
Let's do another episode. Thanks to everyone for being here on YouTube and whatever time frame you are, live or after the fact.
Hello and welcome to Python Bytes, where we deliver Python news and headlines directly to your earbuds.
This is episode 446, recorded August 25th, 2025. I am Michael Kennedy.
And I'm Brian Okken.
And this episode is brought to you by many cool services and products.
Can you imagine a course that teaches you how to use pytest?
An entire library of 270 hours of courses about all Python things.
pytest book and Patreon supporters.
Thank you all.
Yes, check out Brian's courses, Michael's courses, Patreon supporters.
Check out Patreon and all that.
Thank you.
And I actually have another thing that kind of falls into that category
that's pretty awesome I want to talk about later.
If you want to connect with us on the socials,
MastodonBlueSky is probably where we spend most of our time.
Brian, me, the show, we've all got accounts.
You can watch us live on YouTube at pythonbytes.fm.
If the live show is going on, it should say a big banner across the top.
Hey, we're live.
click here to go to it. And if not, you'll just see all the past live streams. So much appreciated
typically Monday at 10 a.m. Pacific time. And you should definitely subscribe to the newsletter
because you'll get a custom email from Brian talking about all the different things we covered
and not just a list of what we've covered, but diving into extra details, extra links,
more background info. Very cool. Also very cool are statistics.
Yeah. Tell us about these things.
Well, we have, there's a website called pypistats.org. And it's nice. You pop into it and it just says
analytics for PyPI packages. So let's pick one. pytest check. It's my favorite little thing that
support. And then what you get is you get these, I'm pretty sure we covered this before, but you
get the download statistics. So that's not really the news. It is a cool website. You should check
it out if you haven't checked out before. And you can also check out the top packages,
which ones are the most downloaded by day, by week, by month. And that's all fun,
but there's some details in the individual package that you might want to know for if you're
supporting stuff so like for example what system uh for py test check it looks like it's pretty
much all Linux 97.5 percent Linux um which makes sense it's a test tool so a lot of the tests are
running in the server uh and not other places but uh the package supports windows anyway
But if I wanted to bail on Windows, I probably wouldn't be a terror.
I mean, I don't think very many people would be mad because...
No, 1% of the people would be pretty upset.
Yeah, well, you know.
So maybe I'll leave it.
It isn't OS-specific anyway.
But some things are, you know.
Okay, so why am I bringing this up?
If this is old news, you should know about it anyway.
But one of the things is a few weeks ago, it went down.
This is a volunteer-supported site.
And it was by C.R. Flynn.
I'm sorry, I don't know his name.
But anyway, posted that, hey, PyStats.org is down.
Somebody reported that like three weeks ago.
And so I noticed that.
and Hugo mentioned it and I saw what was going on but just a couple days ago Hugo announced hey
PyPI stats is back online and it's more supported now so thanks to Janice and the PSF thanks to
Janice for suggesting that the PSF takes stewardship and connecting the right people
like eDurban for migrating and of course Christopher Flynn oh Christopher Flynn was
created it but but a lot of people were involved or at least a handful of people were involved to
get it back online and get it going and I didn't realize so that's cool it's back online works
great and I really appreciate it because I don't use it all the time but occasionally and I will
i'd like to use it i didn't know that there was a a cli for it so uh hugo um
put together a project called pypi stats same name but without the dot org but you can pip install it
and you can run it on the command line and it's super neat um you can actually you can run it on
the command line and you get you get some you can pass it by like python i'm showing on the screen
python minor so it shows uh which python versions are being being downloaded um but you can do other
stuff you you can what i have a list look it up uh you can do python major python minor the system
overall downloads recent downloads so it's a pretty interesting information um the some new
things that just got released are the ability to you were always able to pass in like a name so just
on the command line type in a package name and get the stats but now you can also point it at a
directory or not point it at anything and it'll if you're in the current directory for a project
and it'll just look up pyproject.toml or set up cfg and look it up so uh really cool that um that
Hugo extended that command line thing to be able to look up that information.
That's cool.
It tells you what is the popularity of the packages you're using, basically?
Yeah, well, the popularity, but also just different stuff.
For Pillow, for example, it shows an example.
This is in black and white on the readme, but if you do it on the command line, it's color.
So the color output is really nice.
Nice.
But you can figure out like start and end dates.
So if you want a particular date, you know, for you want to zoom in on dates, how many downloads last month and whatnot.
And the different things like the what Python version is good.
It's kind of cool because that's one of those things of like, do you think it'll be okay if I completely remove support for 3.8?
If I want to bump up to 3.10 or something.
But looking at Pillow, for example, it's still 5% of the people are using 3.8.
And some people are still using 3.6.
So maybe they should still support it.
I'm not sure.
Maybe they support it.
Or maybe they could be the pebble thrown in the water to create the wave that causes those people to upgrade.
Yeah.
There's some cool flags for the command line thing.
like last month or picking a date, easy to read stuff.
And there's an API for it or like a package,
importable package that you can do it programmatically.
So anyway, cool tool.
Very cool.
All right, let's jump over and talk about the state of Python 2025
according to the PSF JetBrains survey.
Ooh, neat.
This article is written by a little known guy named Michael Kennedy.
I actually worked with, yeah, I worked with JetBrains and they're like, Hey, you want to
write this?
I'm like, yeah, sure.
That'd be great.
So basically what I did is I went through all of the, all of the survey results and pulled
out the headlines and like the trends and like what jumped out at me.
All right.
You know, you and I have done this together before, Brian, where we just pull up the survey results and do it on the show.
I did this with like way more time and effort in written form, and then we'll do it on the show.
How's that?
So I think this is maybe like 4,000 words.
It's like quite a write-up, right?
So I want to just, I don't want to go through all of it.
You guys can read it.
But I do want to pull up some interesting trends.
So the first trend I think that's pretty wild is that Python people use Python.
And you're like, oh, Michael, obviously.
But if you had a JavaScript survey, you would ask, do you use JavaScript?
And a lot of people that do Python would say, yeah, I use JavaScript.
A lot of people who do.NET use JavaScript, either as little utilities for Node.
or because they need a website that has interactivity.
So I think it's noteworthy that of the people that are in the Python space,
they're not there as a secondary purpose.
They're there because of Python,
not because they've got some library that they need to work on.
So 86% of people who are Python people use Python.
That's their main thing, right?
As their main.
And then 14% is secondary.
Yeah, yeah.
So maybe they have to support tools in Python,
but that's not really what they do. The other one that I think is wild is that I think we maybe
have mentioned this. I know I've mentioned this on Talk Python before, but people out there are
mostly brand new. I've seen this once before, but it continues to be true even more so,
and it blows my mind. How many years of professional coding experience do you have?
less than two, one to two years, like zero to two years of programming,
that's 50% of the people.
Wow.
50% of the people in the Python space just started.
And if you're one of those 50% listening, thanks for listening.
I know a lot of people listen to our podcasts
so that they can jump into the community and get up to speed.
So that's pretty awesome.
But this has tons of consequences, right?
Like if you're creating tutorials and you're just like, hey, yeah, install that, make a VNV, and then install the package for local editing.
Now we get started with the tutorials.
Like, hold on.
You got to realize you're talking to people that are just getting started, like half of them.
And I think that has a lot of implications for tooling, for tutorials, for presentations, et cetera.
Yeah, but this question is how many years of professional coding, not necessarily how many years of coding.
Yeah, there's more results in there that are like,
how much experience do you have with Python at all?
And it's like really quite low.
Okay.
So this, but this is also noteworthy in the sense that,
like, not just how much time do they have with Python,
but how much they have time professionally coding at all.
Yeah.
Right?
Yeah, and I'm noticing that a lot with people I teach as well.
I get a lot of, on the Python test community,
get a lot of questions that say, I don't know if I can ask this here, but basically I don't
have any CS background. And so I don't know what a lock is or something like that. So I'm like,
yeah, sure. Let's talk about that. Yeah, exactly. Yeah. And it's fine. Another one, I don't know,
I've always thought of like the Python community being broken into thirds, like one thirds or web
API, one-third data science, and one-third catch all others,
automation, little tools, whatever.
Well, that is no longer valid. Data science is now
half of Python.
51%. It's probably 51% AI, too, because
with AI, you can go over 100%.
That's right. Absolutely. You don't need it to add up. Now, this does include data engineers,
who I got a message from so many
saying, I don't want to be grouped in with data
science.
Okay.
But you also don't belong in web.
You don't belong in other, I don't think.
I don't know.
That does include some data
engineering, but nonetheless,
this is a significant portion.
Another thing to keep
in mind.
Does this survey include
the LLM people?
Yeah.
Oh, absolutely.
Yeah, yeah, definitely.
I think a lot of this is people getting into machine learning and so on.
Okay, this is, I think, the last main thing I wanted to –
I know two more things real quick.
The other one is – and this one I think I want to put out there as a –
if you were in this group, reconsider.
Most people, 83% use a major version older of Python or older.
I mean we're at the end of 313
and it's like 83%
are like 312 or below
and not just
we're not at the end of 313
well no not in the end of like
support I mean we're about to have
314 is what I mean
that's what I mean like
313 is not
it's about to no longer be the latest is what I'm
saying
so this is pretty wild and I did some quick
math just like
some people are like, well, it works fine for me.
I don't really need it to be any better.
I don't need the new tools, so 3.11, let's say.
3.11 is fine, or let's say 3.10, 3.10 is fine.
Even 3.9, it's supported for another couple years, right?
Probably. Maybe one.
But let me do some quick math here,
just to see if I can put this in perspective for people.
In addition to just you might need to be on the later version
to have some of the newer tooling, right?
some of the new libraries and so on that decide to drop the old one
so they can adopt some feature, right?
Yeah.
But I said, well, what if you're on 3.11?
48% of the people currently using 3.11,
if they upgraded to 3.13, their code would run 11% faster
and use 10% to 15% less memory.
Yeah.
If you're on 3.10, you get a 42% speed increase
and 20% to 30% less memory
just by changing the Python you're running on.
Chances are it's extremely minimal or zero upgrade costs.
You just got to try it out.
And then I also did some other...
Yeah, this is like no code changes.
Just change the interpreter.
Exactly.
Just change the start command or what's installed.
I said, well, what if you're a medium business?
I did a little research like vendor.com and stuff.
I said the average AWS bill for a medium-sized business is $2.3 million a year.
And EC2 represents 50% to 70% of that.
And if you're paying for a bunch of cloud machines
or cloud compute in whatever form
and you get those boosts I talked about,
well, your small business just saved $420,000
by just changing from 310 to 313.
If you're a large-scale business, like a large enterprise,
you save $5.6 million by just switching to run
on the newer version of Python.
So anyway, I think these are really interesting.
And then the last one is there's a big resurgence in Python web development, I think.
Over the years, this has been trending down 45, 43, 42%.
But it's back, baby.
And not just are people saying that they're doing a little more web development,
but if you look at things like CSS or HTML in terms of how much they're used,
they jumped, I think it's like 15% up year over year.
Not a like 30% to 45%, but the increase from what it was to the new one
is like a 15% growth from what it was previously.
So like all in databases just across the board.
So I think that's really interesting because there had been like a long,
slow trend of kind of like Python's less for web, Python's less for web,
probably more JavaScript, and it's like it's back.
So I think that's pretty interesting.
and then there's a bunch of
guidance that I gave for people
at the end like okay
now that you know all this stuff here are some
actions some actionable things you can
do to take advantage of these trends and
what not so
I've said enough about this people can check it out
it's a super long and interesting
article I think
yeah okay cool I can't wait to check this
out yeah indeed
alright over to you
well I'd like to
swap out and take a look at wrapped i actually i couldn't resist so i i'm going to talk about a
package called wrapped and i went ahead and looked at the pypi stats um and it's um it's used a lot
so it's uh the i don't know numbers what percent wise or where it is at the uh the top packages or
something but um it's downloaded almost five what five million 4.8 million daily downloads that's
pretty good pretty big so um a pretty popular package so what is wrapped wrapped is um i can't
believe we actually haven't talked about this yet but wrapped is a python module for decorators
wrappers and monkey patching and to be honest the first time i ran across wrapped i thought
well wait don't we have functools wraps uh that's what i've been using before um however so let's
let's talk about wrapped a little bit the aim of the module is to provide a transparent object
proxy for python yep wrappers which can be used as a basis for constructing a construction of
functional wrapper function wrappers and decorator functions right got it functools wraps right
no apparently um so uh the wrap module focuses very much on correctness it therefore goes way
beyond the existing mechanisms such as functools wraps to ensure decorators preserve introspectability
signatures type checking abilities okay um yeah because sometimes you'll you like let's say if you
one of the examples of camera where it is in the in the docs but if you if something that is in a
package is implemented as a property, not a method, then the return value is different than if it was
just a function. And functools wraps gets that wrong, but wrapped, I think functools wraps gets
that wrong, but wrapped gets it correct. It has it behave and signature-wise look the same,
which is pretty cool. I wish I knew about this.
I was battling. This decorator doesn't have the right, you know, it transforms the type of signature of this function. So then you get some warning. I'm like, I don't care. It's a web function. No one's going to call it directly, but it's just an IDE warning. I'm like, ah, make it go away.
And to be fair, the main reason why I usually am reaching for, if I reach for functools wraps is because it makes the name of the function be correct.
And it isn't the silly little function.
It changes the name and it changes the doc string.
So if anybody's looking at the name or the doc string, it gets corrected.
And if that's enough for you, yeah, that's fine.
But it's kind of interesting looking at some of the history.
So I was looking back.
There's a blog that the creator of this wrote, Graham Dumpleton.
And this is back from apparently originally, if we go to the blog, it's from originally from 2014.
He started writing these and he's kept them updated.
So last update was five years ago, but original 2014.
Anyway, how you implement your Python decorators is wrong.
I was interested one of the reasons why I was interested in this is the idea that it was around
monkey patching and monkey patching is the original thought process as to why he wrote this is he was
monkey patching things and it was incorrect and interesting discussion over there on the blog
about monkey patching and why why it's not just for testing I use it a lot for testing but it could
be there's a lot of other use cases too interesting blog series of blog posts about it so
So pretty fun to take a look.
One of the amazing examples in the docs,
which I thought was really pretty awesome.
There's some really easy examples that you'll get right away.
And then it goes like pretty deep.
So let's say you've got asynchronous code or multi-threaded code,
and you want to synchronize those with locks.
He's got this write-up, which is kind of a lengthy write-up,
but it's not too bad.
And the end result, if you scroll to the answer at the bottom,
is you can just have synchronized.
You set up these locks, and you decorate each function
that you want synchronized with a synchronized decorator,
and it just works.
So it's kind of fun to be able to do things
like put extra abilities around something like lock,
grabbing a lock or something like that.
Yeah, that's really cool.
We're going to need more of that
as free-threaded Python becomes the thing.
people have to get used to that those concerns yeah and also um the other one of the other
my concerns with jumping to um from functools wrapped to wrap to uh wrapped r-a-w-r-a-p-t
was i was worried about speed because it's doing a lot so is it kind of slow and um and apparently
not uh to ensure the overhead as minimal as possible a c extension module is used if it's
available an automatic fallback to a python implementation is provided if the target system
doesn't have isn't extended for that target system but for my use cases as we've seen um
most of my users are in Linux so we're probably fine there so it's really neat very neat very neat
let's see what is next owen lamont it's back with a good recommendation for us
Okay.
Yeah.
He says, you should check out PySentry.
So I did check out PySentry, and it's quite neat.
So what is PySentry?
It scans your Python dependencies for known vulnerabilities,
and it's Rust-based, so it's fast, and it might get VC funny.
So what it does is you go into a folder, a project.
I'm not sure if it needs an active virtual environment or just the files,
but it will scan uv lock, poetry lock, pip lock,
pyproject.toml, pip file, and requirements.txt.
Look for specific versions of dependencies that you are specifying there,
and it will cross-check them with a bunch of vulnerability databases.
Not just typosquatting type stuff, but just, hey,
There was this vulnerability reported in the Django admin.
You should update because you don't want to participate in that kind of fun.
You're not about that life.
So pretty cool.
Yeah, it has multiple data sources, the PyPA advisory database,
PyPI JSON API, OSV dev open source vulnerabilities, and so on.
Yeah, and it's pretty neat.
So you can specify different levels.
Dependency scopes are supported like dev versus main.
direct versus transitive dependencies and that kind of thing.
I ran it on our setup on pythonbytes.fm, which apparently...
Now, one thing really quick here is it actually has more than...
It says, PyCentury security audit.
Summary, 89 packages scanned, one vulnerable, one vulnerability found.
Ah, Brian, what's going on?
There's actually more than 89 packages for our website.
but I don't know why.
Maybe there's just no information about some unpopular ones,
and so that's why they didn't show up.
They weren't scanned.
I don't know.
I don't know why it's less, but that's my conjecture.
It says there's one unfixed low severity CVE found,
and it's unfixable.
Great.
That's why it's still there.
What is it?
It is an aiohttp.
If an invalid IPv6 URL is passed to it, it will go bonkers.
I don't care.
This is the dependency of a dependency of a dependency
that internally calls an API to its own service,
and it uses AIOHTP to do that.
No one's going to pass an invalid IPv6 URL to that thing
because it's not even part of our code.
It just happens to be we ask the service to do something.
It goes, OK, I got to call my API in the cloud and do that.
But here it is.
So you can decide, is it an issue or not?
But still, that's pretty cool.
You could just run this in your project periodically,
or you could maybe run it as part of CI-CD and get warnings.
Hey, maybe I shouldn't put this in production.
It says there's a CVE severity level 10 out of 10 remote code execution,
no auth required.
Let's not do that.
Yeah, interesting.
Yeah.
One thing to be aware of, you don't uv tool install PyCentury.
You install PyCentury-RS.
So just be careful on the install.
I don't know what's at PyCentury, but I presume it's not this.
Oh, okay.
So you have to be careful what you're installing?
Yeah, just look at the website.
and the name of the command and the package are different.
Yeah, and I know that that happens, but it always, like...
I don't like it.
Just pick a different package name, people.
Come on.
One quick extra for me is that I talked about this last week,
that our testing code is being offline to archived or whatever.
It's not going offline, I don't think.
So last week, Michael convinced me to think about archiving it away.
So you'll be able to go to testandcode.com and find it for the foreseeable future, I think, looking into ways to offload it to somewhere else.
But there's some pretty cool things that make it seamless.
So I think that as I get time in the next couple of months,
it'll transition over and nobody will know the difference,
except for maybe the website will look different.
But other than that, also, I've gotten a whole bunch of great comments.
So a lot of people have gone over to the contact page.
And so in the episodes, I've said, hey, you can go over to pythontest.com
and there's a contact page and you can reach me if you want.
I'm not really fishing for compliments, but a lot of people have said, hey, I've enjoyed this podcast and thanks.
And just some nice emails have come in.
So that's cool.
So thank you, everybody.
That's very nice.
That's it.
I'm glad to see you're keeping it online.
That's cool.
Actually, somebody contacted me and said, I was worried.
So I downloaded all the episodes.
So, you know, you don't have to do that.
But very proactive.
Okay, Michael, how about extras for you?
I have some extras.
I have some rumble follow-up.
This is the Markdown Lentor that we talked about previously.
Let me do it in reverse order.
So I'm actually almost ready to release my Talk Python in Production book,
which I've been working on.
It's about 300 pages now.
I'm going to release it as an e-book initially.
If it's worthwhile, I'll eventually do a print.
but certainly an ebook that you can get. So you can read about the first third of it online,
which is fun. So if people are interested, they can go through and read the first
seven chapters, I think, which is exactly what's in the book. And then you'll be able to actually
buy the rest of the book, right? Pretty soon. So why am I starting out with this? Well, one,
I encourage you right now, it's not quite released yet, go click on buy the book.
Please put your name in and email address.
Say I'm interested when this comes out and I'll email you very, very soon.
But the reason I'm talking about this is I've been grinding on that thing with like 45,000 words worth of markdown with rumble.
And I have some reports.
It's been going really well, actually.
The thing works great.
It's found some issues, some of them I didn't like.
I didn't like the fixes it was proposing.
like we talked about it word wrapping at like line 80
or whatever you set it at.
And I'm like, no, because in my markdown editors,
it shows that kind of formatting.
I want it to just wrap around and not be like weird,
no wrapping wrapping.
So you can turn those things off.
Yeah, exactly.
The other thing is I pointed out that there was a bug
and it not sort of looking up the directory
tree to find the config file if you're down in the guts.
And so Ruben very kindly said, you know what?
That's a good idea.
I'll fix it and just released a fix that made it a little bit better.
There's a lot of traction going on here.
Yeah.
That would have bugged me too.
I'm like, well, the reason it bugged me is there's the book,
and then there's a source folder full of all the markdown.
Then there's other folders that are output and assets and so on.
And I was down in the lower one, and I ran it on accident.
And it completely formatted and changed everything
based on the defaults of the tool, not all the specs I set.
And I'm like, no.
No, no, no.
How much work is this going to--
luckily, I just rolled it back in Git.
But it was easier to apply the few changes
that I wanted to keep than to redo all those things.
Anyway, that's fixed now.
So it's awesome.
And then finally, I thought maybe people
would be interested in the config that I was using,
that I am using.
and I turned off a bunch of things and added comments
to what I turned off, like line wrapping, for example.
And also, I don't know where I got the config file.
I got it from somewhere, but some of the settings were not right.
I can't remember exactly what it was,
but maybe they were not under a global tag or some weird thing
in the TOML.
So I put mine up, and it seems to work if people want to borrow it.
So anyway.
Cool.
So that's in the show notes, right?
That is all in the-- yeah, that's all in the show notes.
I've made it a gist, and you can get it from the gist.
If you get the gist, Brian.
It's just that easy.
That is right.
And then I think-- oh, yeah, one more thing.
Remember, last time I speculated, could Python 3.13.6
be the final 3.13 before 3.14?
No.
The answer is no.
The answer is a hard no.
answer is actually no 3.17 was released before you talked about 3.16 because 3.16 came out I wrote it
in the show notes and then I didn't look for a few days then we did the show and 3.17 had already
come out well that's a hard no 3.13.7 yeah sorry 3.13.7 um and but here's here's the thing
interesting why. Why is that the case? It is an emergency bug fix for an issue or a problem
introduced in 3.13.6. So in 3.13.6, there was something that went wrong. And they're like,
ah, what was it? A regression in the SSL module between 3.13.5, 3.13.6, reading from a TLS
encrypted connection block that actually sounds like you really want that to work so yeah well
so don't predict it again because the next one will just be the reason will be to make michael
wrong exactly yeah how about that for a release note huh okay that's it for all my extras okay
well ready from ready for a joke or you got something else for us it's like 98 degrees here
Yes, I'm ready for a joke.
So hot.
I know.
Neither of us have air conditioning in our current setup right now.
I'm above the garage in this separate building that has literally no AC.
I have to close the windows because the road noise.
This is my little spa time, my sauna time.
And I am in a house that used to have lovely air conditioning,
and it picked the hottest weekend of the year to break.
Because when else would it break?
All right.
Well, it's going to be fine, Brian.
Don't you worry about it.
Do you know why?
Why?
Because this planet is marked for death.
Okay.
So says the Silver Surfer.
Now, I don't even know what show the Silver Surfer is from.
I know it's one of those Marvel or Avenger type shows.
But the Silver Surfer appears and says,
your planet is marked for death.
And people say, can we ask why?
Well, the Silver Surfer says,
because your planet's beings chose JavaScript
as the primary language of web development.
clearly a fatal flaw.
What is wrong with him?
We're going to have to just finish you off.
You're clearly not worthy.
That's good.
Yeah.
I can come up with some other reasons
that it might pick as well right now.
You know what?
The Silver Surfer is not a fan of random frameworks.
I'll tell you what, though.
At least my frustration with all this kind of stuff
is not that JavaScript is a language for front-end development.
It's that it's the only language ever after 25, 30 years of code running in browsers,
that it's the only language.
And we've had WebAssembly for 10 years.
It's fairly ridiculous.
Anyway, thank you, Silver Surfer, for putting us out of our misery.
Yeah.
Maybe not.
No, no.
Pat says you should come visit Iowa, by the way.
Lovely weather and not melting there.
All right.
Thank you, Pat.
I like Iowa.
Indeed.
And with that, Brian, thanks for a lovely show as always.
Bye, everyone.
Bye.